# 1.1 Python Ecosystem

## What do you need to run your Python code?
- Python. Most packages work with Python3. Your laptop may already come with one. We recommend downloading Anaconda, which comes with a version of python, and aliasing $python$ to the binary executable python specific to conda.

- A code: Some files with .py extension

- Dependencies: specific modules that contains many functions related to each other (e.g. numpy, scipy, pandas, scikit-learn). Often these modules are packages imported in the python code as


      import numpy as np

- To run a python code with the proper dependencies, you need to define its environment: Version of Python + Some packages + Version of packages

## What are virtual environments?
A Python virtual environment is an isolated working copy of a specific version of Python interpreter together with specific versions of a number of external libraries installed into that virtual environment.

- You may have on your computer different Python codes with different versions of packages
- You give your code to a friend
- Some of your packages may depend on other packages, with a specific version. How to make sure you have the right version of everything?

## How to deal with this?
Install [miniconda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html).

* User interface + command line
* Tools for developing code in Python: JupyterLab, Spyder
* Jupyter notebook (more on this later)
* Tools for managing environment

### Basic conda commands


      conda info

... to check conda version to make sure its installed.

      env list

... to list out available environments (the starred * environment is the current activate environment).

      conda env create --file environment.yml

... to create conda environment from environment file.

      conda env remove --yes --name myenv

... to delete the conda environment.

      conda activate myenv

... to activate a conda enivronment by the env name `myenv`. Inside the environment, there are other ways to add libraries. Use `conda install` or `pip3 install` to add packages that will be automatically saved.

      conda deactivate

... to deactivate the current cona environment.

<br>

### Example of .yml file
    name: MLlabs
        channels:
          - conda-forge
          - defaults
        dependencies:
          - python=3.9
          - jupyter
          - matplotlib
          - numpy
          - pandas
          - scipy
          - scikit-learn
          - pytorch

To learn more about Anaconda environments, visit [this site](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html)

### How to freeze an environment

      (venv) $ pip3 freeze > requirements.txt

These will provide the libraries and their very specific versions so that codes can be reproduced in the exact same environment. Example of a requirement file is:

      cycler==0.10.0            # via matplotlib
      kiwisolver==1.2.0         # via matplotlib
      matplotlib==3.2.1
      numpy==1.18.5
      pandas==1.0.4
      pyparsing==2.4.7          # via matplotlib
      python-dateutil==2.8.1    # via matplotlib, pandas
      pytz==2020.1              # via pandas
      scipy==1.4.1              # via seaborn
      seaborn==0.10.1
      six==1.15.0               # via cycler, python-dateutil


